CIP-0041? | UPLC Serialization Optimizations (#314)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-optimized-uplc-serialization/README.md

---
CIP: "???"
Title: optimized UPLC serialization  
Authors: Michele Nuzzi <michele.nuzzi.2014@gamil.com> 
Discussions-To: TBD
Comments-Summary: TBD  
Comments-URI: TBD  
Status: Draft  
Type: Standards Track  
Created: <date created on, in ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format>  
License: CC-BY-4.0  
License-Code: Apache-2.0  
Post-History: <dates of postings to Cardano Dev Forum, or link to thread>  
---

## Abstract

> this document describes the parts of the current serialization algorithm that can be improved and provides the specification and documentation needed in order to implement an optimized version of this one.

Reviewer: You probably want to clean up the formatting, e.g. use capital case at the beginning of sentences.

## Specification

### Table of contents

- [```pad0``` should add nothing](#pad0)
- [constant's types list should work as Integer ones](#constT)
- [remove the "type application" tag for constant types](#tyApp)
- [```ByteString```s encoded as unsinged integer followed by the bytes](#ByteStrings)
- [```data``` serialization
](#data)

<a name="pad0"></a>

### ```pad0``` should add nothing rather than an entire byte

sometimes it is necessary to allign the serialized program (partial or total) to fit into a byte;

in order to do so, some padding is added based on the current bit-length of the program;

the needed padding can be obtained as follows
```ts
pad( 8 - (currBitLength % 8) )
```
where the ```pad``` function could be defined as follows in typescript
```ts
pad( missingBits: 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 ): string
{
    switch( missingBits )
    {
        case 0: return "00000001";
        case 1: return "1";
        case 2: return "01";
        case 3: return "001";
        case 4: return "0001";
        case 5: return "00001";
        case 6: return "000001";
        case 7: return "0000001";
    }

> }

Reviewer: What language is this? Why not describe this in Haskell?

Author: typescript just because I feel the description is more intuitive using it

it translates to haskell as
```hs
pad :: Int -> String
pad 0 = "00000001"
pad 1 = "1"
pad 2 = "01"
pad 3 = "001"
pad 4 = "0001"
pad 5 = "00001"
pad 6 = "000001"
pad 7 = "0000001"
pad _ = undefined
```

- ```List``` becomes a ```data-list``` containing 1 ```Data``` per element
- ```I``` becomes a ```data-int``` tag expecting a signed integer
- ```B``` becomes a ```data-bs``` tag expecting a ```ByteString```

this design is unambigous since ```data-list``` that maps back to two of the constructors contains different values depending on what Constructor is intended.

the only edge case for the ```data-list``` constructor is the empty list, but the problem can be easly solved by expecting one single bit only in the case of the empty list indicating the intended constructor.

so the empty ```Map``` would serialize as
```
01 # data-list tag
0  # list nil construcor ( empty list )
0  # bit indicating Map data constructor
```
and the empty ```List``` as
```
01 # data-list tag
0  # list nil construcor ( empty list )
1  # bit indicating List data constructor
```

the second design also implies no more ```Data``` constructors will be added in the future, or that for those added it will be possible to find an unambigous representation using the ones specified.

## Rationale

This proposal suggest ways to reduce serialized scripts size.

> the changes where designed to keep the bit oriented style of flat minimizing the number of required bits for values where possible.

Reviewer 2: The rationale section is a bit _thin_, though there's a bit of rationale sprinkled in various places of the specification. It'd be nice to have a summary of what motivates each design choices. This can most likely be done by reworking a bit how the specification is written (that is, write the specification without justifications, and move the justifications to the rationale section). 

For example, most of the "data serialization" section is about explaining what is currently wrong with the `Data` CBOR serialization. Instead, leave the specification focused to what the proposal is about, and move the rationale to this section. 
  
It'd be nice to consider some benchmarks? Taking some reference UPLC and serializing them side-by-side with the two methods to see how much gain one can expect.

Author: Thank you @KtorZ; will refactor as suggested ( and correct the various typos 😄 )

---
CIP: "???"
Title: optimized UPLC serialization  

> Authors: Michele Nuzzi <michele.nuzzi.2014@gamil.com> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Authors: Michele Nuzzi <michele.nuzzi.2014@gmail.com> 
```

here the motivations behind the choices in design are made explicit:

### ```pad0``` encodes as no bits

sometimes it is necessary to allign the serialized program (partial or total) to fit into a byte;

in order to do so, the specification includes a ```pad``` fuction used to allign a partially serialized program prior the append of an elements that requires it, and at the end of a program in order to encode the result as a ```ByteString```.

by definition ```pad``` adds ```n - 1``` ```0```s directly followed by a ```1```.

the needed padding can be obtained as follows
```ts
pad( 8 - (currBitLength % 8) )
```
where the ```pad``` function could be defined as follows in typescript
```ts
pad( missingBits: 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 ): string
{
    switch( missingBits )
    {
        case 0: return "00000001";
        case 1: return "1";
        case 2: return "01";
        case 3: return "001";
        case 4: return "0001";
        case 5: return "00001";
        case 6: return "000001";
        case 7: return "0000001";
    }
}
```
the case in which the ```missingBits``` is 0 implies that the current serialized program is already byte-alligned

> since this padding carries no usefull informations, the current ```pad( 0 )``` adds a useless byte each time a padding is needed and the number of used bits is a multiple of 8.

Reviewer 3: I think that the reason for this is so that the decoder can easily discard padding at the end without having to check whether it's at a byte boundary, and this makes it faster.  The proposed change would on average save one bit per bytestring, so I'm not sure if it's worth it.

Author: if the proposed changes are accepted the only place where padding will be used is at the end of the script; since bytestring will no longer require to be byte alligned

the check for ```pad( 0 )``` then becomes just ```lengthInBits `mod` 8 == 0```

data TagList = Cons ConstTag TagList | Nil
```

on which is defined an ```encode``` function that returns a ```String``` representing the encoded bits

```hs
encodeTag :: ConstTag -> String
encodeTag tag = "xxxx"

encodeTagList :: TagList -> String
encodeTagList ( Cons tag types ) = "1" ++ encodeTag tag ++ encodeTagList types
encodeTagList ( Nil ) = "0"
```

#### new ```type``` serialization

using the same model of before the new specification would require to change the ```TagList``` definition to
```hs
data TagList = Cons ConstTag TagList | Nil ConstTag
```

allowing to encode as:
```hs
encodeTag :: ConstTag -> String
encodeTag tag = "xxxx"

encodeTagList :: TagList -> String
encodeTagList ( Cons tag types ) = "1" ++ encodeTag tag ++ encodeTagList types
encodeTagList ( Nil tag ) = "0" ++ encodeTag tag
```

### remove the "type application" tag for constant types

as per specification constant terms are typed using tags.

these tags are serialized as 4 bits and currently so 16 options ( 0 to 15 inclusive ) of wich 9 are used as follows

tags from ```integer``` to ```bool``` and the ```data``` one are directly followed by the respective value encoding;

> tags ```list``` and ```pair``` are the only tags that do require some other tag in order to be a defined type; since the twos always require some other type in order to be valid, the type application is implcit and it should be removed.

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's a bit annoying: it's like that because it reflects how the internal representations of types work.  The extra generality might permit us to do some more complex things in future, but it's not clear if we'll ever actually need that.  Simplifying this might be a good thing to do, since it complicates the encoding/decoding process as well as taking up extra room.

citing the plutus core specificaiton draft released in june 2022 (latest specification at the time of writing)

> Bytestrings are encoded by dividing them into nonempty blocks of up to 255 bytes and emitting each block in sequence.
>
> Each block is preceded by a single unsigned byte containing its length, and the end of the encoding is marked by a zero-length block (so the empty bytestring is encoded just as a zero-length block).
>
> Before emitting a bytestring, the preceding output is padded so that its length (in bits) is a multiple of 8;
>
> if this is already the case a single padding byte is still added; this ensures that contents of the bytestring are aligned to byte boundaries in the output.

given the importance of bytestrings too much hoverhead is introduced; currently a ```ByteString``` serializes as

```
1) some padding that, depending on the context, may take up to 1 byte
2) 1 (byte * chunk) indicating how many bytes are in the very next chunk
3) 0 to 255 meaningful (bytes * chunk)
4) 1 useless byte indicating no more chiunks are following
```
this implies ```(~1) + #chunks + 1``` meaningless bytes are added per ```ByteString```

in the descripton above

> - step ```1``` allows for an easy serialization and deserialization but doesn't carries any meaningful informations; given the importance of ByteStrings it should be removed at the cost of an added shift while serializing/deserializing the value

Reviewer 3: I think that might slow things down significantly, since I think we'd need to shift every byte in a bytestring if it didn't start at a byte boundary.  It's important that on-chain deserialisation be as fast as possible, so the extra expense might be problematic.  I'd like to see some benchmark results for this.

Author: It might be possible to implement deserialization without shifting bytes for efficiency

I'll leave here the [plu-ts implementation of the `readNBits`](https://github.com/HarmonicPool/plu-ts/blob/54332ac5716bcd0ddf51d512388a0cc74e904dde/src/onchain/UPLC/UPLCDecoder/index.ts#L142) function on which the deserialization process is based

I believe a very similar result can be achieved in Haskell using the [`Data.Binary.Get` monad](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/binary-0.10.0.0/docs/Data-Binary-Get.html)

- step ```4``` can be removed as it is simply useless
- step ```3``` can be optimized using unsigned integer encoding

the new algorithm for ```ByteString``` serialization would consist of two parts:
```
1) Unsigned (indefinite length) Integer indicating how many bytes ( or chunks of 8 bits ) are following
2) as many bytes as specified in the Unsigned Integer at step 1
```

> using the new algorithm the ```ByteString``` serialization space complexity goes form ```O(n)``` to ```O(log n)``` where ```n``` is the number of bytes in the ```ByteString``` 

Reviewer 3: Hmmm.  I need to think more carefully about this.  It's a while since I've thought about bytestring encodings and I'll need to remind myself of the details of how we currently do it.

### ```data``` serialization

> All the effort of minimizing the size of on-chain scripts by prefering ```flat``` over ```CBOR``` serialization are ignored when it comes to ```data``` serialization.

Reviewer 3: Yes, it would be good to have a more efficient encoding of `Data` rather than just wrapping the CBOR representation.  However, I think the reason for this is that `Data` is used elsewhere on the chain (including things that are passed to validator scripts as parameters), and CBOR is the preferred format there.  It might be difficult to switch because of this.

Author: conversion from CBOR to a specific data encoding can be done by the node prior to being passed as argument;

CBOR encoding is definitely to expansive to be included in a script

- ```List``` is folloed by a list of ```Data``` elements
- ```I``` is followed by a **signed** integer
- ```B``` is followed by a ```ByteString``` 

An important **alternative design** is the one described in the option 2.

this alternative allows for 2 bits data tags for the ```Constr``` constructor and the simple values constructors ```I``` and ```B``` containitng the actual data;

and a 3 bit tag for ```List``` and ```Map``` constructors;

this is done in order to minimize the number of bits per constructor without introducing unused tags (which is the case of a 3 bit tag for all constructors; tags 5, 6 and 7 would be unused) but still being capable of encoding all 5 constructors.

the second design also implies no more ```Data``` constructors will be added in the future, or that for those added it will be possible to find an unambigous representation using the ones specified.

## Backward Compatibility

the proposed changes to the algorithm will cause the same UPLC Abstract Syntaxt Tree to serialize in a different way based on the algorithm used;

> In order to allow the deserializaton process to handle the old serialization algorithm the version of the program sholud be chcked first.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to allow the deserializaton process to handle the old serialization algorithm the version of the program should be checked first.
```
